Erika Ito
Carbonate Dissolution Due to Ocean Acidification and the Rate of Recovery of Benthic Foraminifera

Introduction
      The objective of this study is to test the impact of ocean acidification on carbonate
sedimentation and preservation. Quantifying the impact of different levels of acidity on carbonate sedimentation is important in investigating the recovery of foraminifera after extinction events. It is possible that the intervals of time over which planktonic foraminiferal populations rebounded after ocean acidification events have been underestimated due to dissolution of carbonate sediments. It is also important to quantify changes in carbonate preservation in acidic conditions in order to properly estimate the time it took for the carbon system to re-equilibrate after being pushed out of equilibrium by some massive input or perturbation. 
      The issue of rapid global carbon emissions in the modern makes understanding the biotic response to ocean acidification and massive carbon system perturbations highly relevant. 
      I hypothesize that increased dissolution of carbonate sediments have created an illusion of rapid recoveries of benthic foraminifera after extinction events believed to be related with ocean acidification.
      
Justification
      Understanding the consequences of perturbations to the carbon cycle like ocean acidification is relevant in the modern in the wake of rapid anthropogenic carbon emissions. Atmospheric, continental, sedimentological, and oceanic carbon reservoirs are all connected in the global carbon exchange system.  
      There is evidence of ocean acidification resulting from the massive 12C input associated with the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM). Sediment cores from the Ocean Drilling Project site at Walvis Ridge in the southeastern Atlantic Ocean reveal an abrupt transition from calcareous ooze to red pelagic clay at the Paleocene-Eocene boundary followed by a gradual recovery back to carbonate ooze. The negative ?13C excursion signifying a massive carbon input into the ocean system is concurrent with the rapid drop in wt% of CaCO3. The decrease in carbonate preservation during this interval is indicative of ocean acidification, and rapid shoaling of the carbonate compensation depth (CCD) and lysocline causing carbonate dissolution. 
      Lower estimates of the carbon release during the PETM of ~1Pg per year have been approximated using carbon system models, and are similar in magnitude to anthropogenic carbon emissions from the past fifty years (Zeebe, 2009). Over the past two centuries, oceans have absorbed roughly 40% of anthropogenic CO2 (Zeebe, 2008). The impact of this uptake on ocean water chemistry has been observed, as surface ocean pH has decreased by about 0.1 units in the last 100 years (IPCC, 2014). 
      Future models predict that atmospheric CO2 levels may increase to 880 ppm by the end of the century (Freely, 2009). Biogeochemical ocean models predict a consequent increase in ocean acidity by 150% from a pre-industrial level of 8.2 to 7.8 pH units (Freely, 2009). It is therefore important to thoroughly study the PETM and similar ancient analogs of ocean acidification, because these events may occur again in the near future.
	Elevated CO2 in ocean water causes reduction in carbonate ion concentrations due to dissolution. A decrease in just 0.2 to 0.3 units of ocean water pH inhibit biocalcification of many marine organisms such as corals, plankton, and foraminifera (Zeebe, 2008). This may is supported by the appearance of the thin-shelled planktonic morphotypes, M. allisonensis  and A. sibaiyaensis which exclusively appear at the Paleocene-Eocene boundary, a time of ocean acidification, at tropical sites (Kelly, 1996). An impedance to biocalcification due to ocean acidification and the consequent carbonate undersaturation likely played into the major benthic foram extinction (BFE) which also occurred at the Paleocene-Eocene boundary. Understanding and being able to predict biotic responses to ocean acidification and consequent extinctions is critical in terms of developing future bioconservation strategies. Being able to accurately assess the time interval of the acidification event and isotope excursion is also important for predicting the future impacts of anthropogenic carbon emissions, and their durations. In order assess the timing of the carbon system and biotic post-extinction recovery, the impact of ocean acidification on carbonate preservation must be further investigated. 
Research Plan
	This research plan involves actualistic experimentation used to quantify the rate and amount of carbonate dissolution in different levels of acidity. This data can be applied to past ocean acidification events such as the PETM to investigate the time richness of sediment layers. This will allow for a more accurate estimation of the duration of the post-BFE rebound of benthic foraminifera, and the duration of recovery from the massive carbon perturbation. 
	In this experiment, ten samples of seawater of identical volume will be used. Tanks for the seawater samples will have the same geometry and volume. The temperature and chemistry conditions of the seawater samples will be identical, with the only difference being the pH level. Different types of modern carbonate microfossils including coccoliths and foraminifera will be required. Calcitic and aragonitic carbonate sediment samples will be collected, and tested separately to account for their differences in stability in acidic environments. This is essential in relating experimental results with different time periods and localities. An initial point count of whole shells versus fragments for the calcitic and aragonitic sediments must be taken. 
	Identical masses of carbonate sediment will then be submerged into the seawater samples of varying acidity. Calcitic and aragonitic compositions will be separated. Using a carbonic acid dropper, two seawater samples in tanks will be adjusted to pH levels of 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. The pH levels of each tanks must be tested using a pH probe meter. Each respective pH sample will be tested with calcite and aragonite, making ten samples total. 
 	After submerging the carbonate microfossils, the magnitude of carbonate dissolution will be measured over regular time intervals. Upon submergence, the vertical thickness of the carbonate layer in the tanks will be marked. Every two hours, the thickness of the carbonate layer will be marked and recorded, pH will be measured, and sample of about 250 shells will be analyzed from each tank. The analyzation process will involve microscopic investigation of the shells to determine a point count. 
      These measurements will be taken on two hour intervals for a period of twenty-four hours. Then, the three measures of carbonate dissolution over time, including layer thickness reduction, gradual pH increase, and point count data will be compared and correlated.  
	The experimental results will be plotted as temporal graphs reflecting the amount of carbonate dissolved over time. This will be represented using three graphs: of carbonate layer thickness over time, pH level over time, and shell fragment to whole shell ratio over time. These graphs can be used to draw conclusions about the rate of carbonate sediment dissolution in conditions of varying acidity. This information can be used to draw more accurate conclusions about the timing of the PETM carbon isotope excursion and benthic foram extinction recovery.







References
Brewer, P. G., Fabry, V. J., Hilmi, K., Jung, S., Poloczanska, E., Sundby, S. 2014. The Ocean in  IPCC Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, p. 1-138.

Freely, R. A., Doney, S. C., and Cooley, S. R. 2009. Ocean Acidification: Present Conditions and Future Changes in a High- CO2 World: Oceanography, v. 22, p. 36-47.

Kelly, D.C., Zachos, J.C., Silvia, I. P., and Thomas, E. T. 1996. Rapid Diversification of Planktonic Foraminifera in the Tropical Pacific (ODP Site 865) During the Late Paleocene Thermal Maximum: Geology, v. 22, p. 423-426.

Zeebe, R.E., Zachos, J.C., and Dickens, R.G. 2009. Carbon Dioxide forcing Alone Insufficient to
Explain Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum Warming: Nature Geoscience, v. 2, p. 576-580.

Zeebe, R. E., Zachos, J.C., Caldeira, K., and Tyrrell, T. 2008. Carbon Emissions and Acidification: Science. V. 321, p. 51-52.

