Erika Ito
February 7th, 2016
Write-Up 3

Niche Conservatism Above the Species Level
by Elizabeth A. Hadly, Paula A. Spaeth, and Cheng Li (2009)
Part I
        The article explored several questions: How have past geographic ranges of higher level ecological niches been altered by major climatic events in the past? How do changes in ecological niches on the species level impact higher level ecological niche-spaces? What controls of niche conservatism are more influential at different taxonomic levels? The controls include environment-based variables and trait-based variables. Environment-based variables are interactions with the environment. Trait-based variables are species-inherited traits, mainly morphological and physiological.
        The hypothesis tested in the article is that ecological niches and niche conservatism are apparent at taxonomic levels above species. To test this, geographic  ranges of multiple taxonomic levels of North American mammals were used as a proxy of higher-level taxonomic niches to determine whether or not that range has changed in the last 130,000 years. This time span was chosen to investigate how these ranges changed in response to the transition from the last glacial to the interglacial. This may allow for the prediction or better understanding of the implications of future climate change on ecological niches and conservation. Relative and absolute sizes of geographic ranges of mammal fauna were estimated using the fossil record. Sixty-three mammalia were chosen that persisted from the Late Pleistocene to the Late Holocene. These genus were all assigned to families. Data was compiled from the NEOTOMA Paleoecology Database from each of these time periods, and the Geographic Information System was used to estimate genus and family range. This resulted in the conclusion that ecological niches above the species level, specifically at the genus and family level, remained relatively constant in the past 130,00 years. Extinctions within each genus did not impact genus level niche conservation, suggesting ecological traits were conserved above the species level. Furthermore, it was concluded geographic ranges of species within a genera are controlled more by competition between species within the genus, more than by the abiotic environment. All of this was taken to suggest that the ecological niches are influenced by environmental controls at the species level, while higher level niches are influenced by intrinsic life history traits such as dispersal ability, potential for population growth, body size, and degree of ecological specialization. Thus geographic distributions were maintained at the genus level.

Part II
        I liked that a ranking system was used in the analysis of changes in geographic areas of different species or genus. This relative comparison helped standardize the data, and took into account the geographic and geologic history of North America. As stated, over the past 130,000 years the geographic range of terrestrial mammals has increased significantly due to the melting of glaciers. This also helped try to account for the bias in the fossil record for the increased preservation of more recent specimens. Taking these geologic and geographic realities into consideration was important in maintaining the validity of the arguments and conclusions made in the paper. 
        I also liked the emphasis of the importance of conservation of the generic pool, and that the paper focused greatly on niche conservation at higher taxonomic levels. I think this challenges many people to think about animal conservation techniques in a different way, since many modern techniques put great focus on the species. I thought using the geologic record to investigate higher taxonomic levels over large timescales was very clever.

Part III
        I did not like that the authors seemed to suggest the patterns witnessed between the Late Pleistocene and the Late Holocene in terms of niche conservatism may provide an analog for the impacts of modern climate change and insights on how it should be approached. It should not be assumed that the same patterns of generic niche fluctuations being buffered by species aggregation apply today in light of modern conditions. Habitat loss and patchiness, the changes of the North American landscape by humans, and impending rapid climate change may greatly alter some of the ecological patterns observed in the time window chosen for the study. Because of this, the authors’ assertion that conservation on the genus level is more important than species today, and that important ecological traits will be preserved is presumptuous. 
        I believe the article and study would have been improved had been at least several more time windows chosen between the 130,000 given range. This would have given more resolution to seeing how species and higher level niches respond to environmental changes. I think it is possible that there may have been initial changes in genus-level geographic ranges immediately following the climactic event, or following a species extinction within the genus and then a subsequent that may not have been visible on such a large timescale. Studying shorter term changes could be incredibly valuable. I think studying niche changes on shorter timescales may also give more information on how more rapid climate changes may lead to different results. 

Part IV
        Table one displays important data for all of the mammalian genera used in the study including body size, number of species per genus, and range rank and size during the Late Holocene and Late Pleistocene. This table revealed the lack of significant difference in range size and rank between the Late Holocene and Late Pleistocene of each genus, suggesting that the ecological niche was more or less conserved at the genus level. A table is the best way to show this information as opposed to a graph or illustration given the amount of relevant data. 
        Figure one shows changes in geographic range area between the Late Pleistocene and Late Holocene for each genera. I believe this was meant to convey a lack of significant change between the two time periods for most genera. I believe it would have been more effective to organize the figure laterally by the magnitude of the area change rather than by rank.
        Figure two is meant to give a visual representation of changes in geographic ranges for several genera in the study. Given the fact that relative changes in geographic range between genera are more meaningful than actual changes in area within a species for the sake of the study, I think the figure would be better left out from the article.
        Figure three is a graph revealing the strong one to one correlation between Late Pleistocene and Late Holocene generic range sizes. This figure conveys the information in a clear manner that could not be paralleled in words, so I would not change it.
