Erika Ito
Write-Up 4
Cenozoic Latitudinal Response Curves: Individualistic Changes in the Latitudinal Distributions of Marine Bivalves and Gastropods
by Andrew A. Zaffos and Arnold I. Miller (2015)
Part I
        This article focused broadly on how genera shift over different time increments in terms of preferred latitude and latitudinal tolerance. The study used Cenozoic marine bivalve and gastropod genera occurrence data from the Paleobiology Database to estimate latitudinal distributions at different times. Latitudinal tolerance and preferred latitude parameters were calculated for specific time intervals in the Cenozoic. This allowed the investigation of possible changes in parameters through time. Preferred latitudes, peak abundance, and latitudinal tolerance of each genus were estimated using Gaussian logistic regression (GLR). Scatter plots between paired parameters were used to calculate correlation coefficients and least-squares linear regression slopes. This revealed information about conservancy or changes in latitudinal distributions, and migration directions and patterns. The degree values of latitudinal shift in preferred latitude or latitudinal tolerance were plotted to determine the proportion of large changes to small changes. Finally, a bootstrapping procedure was used to figure which changes in parameters are statistically significant. A canonical correspondence analysis, which does not assume a Gaussian distribution, was also used to confirm the quality of the GLR parameter results. With these methods, the authors concluded there is no evidence for long-term poleward or equatorward migration of marine genera studied. The hollow curve distributions exhibited for the epoch-to-epoch and stage-to-stage preferred latitude and latitudinal tolerance changes were taken to suggest a general, underlying biogeographic conservatism of genera latitudinally. 

Part II
        I liked that the paper acknowledged that taxon do not necessarily follow a spatially normal distribution. I appreciated that this uncertainty was accounted for in the study itself by using canonical correspondence analysis to test the validity of the Gaussian logistic regression model. 
        I also was pleased the authors offered explanations for why they did not find evidence for poleward migration despite other studies having supported that idea. This section presented arguments about ways in which the data may be biased due to sampling issues or lacking due to time-averaging over long timescales. It also discussed a couple potential drivers for equatorward migration including bridge species and climatic changes. Some of these explanations were dismissed by the authors, but it was helpful for me to to understand the many angles of looking at the topic of marine genera distributions, in order to situate myself in the argument and think more broadly on the matter.  

Part III
        The article went into detail about the data culling process and how and at what scale occurrences were binned by paleolatitude. It was stated that small samples, rare taxa, freshwater and terrestrial genera, and genera without a family in the Paleobiology Database were removed from the binning process. This was valuable information to include in the article, however, the article continues, revealing that the culling requirements were “loosened” to include rare genera and less diverse samples, still creating robust results. It seems there should have been a postulation on how loosening the culling requirements could have changed the results of the study; if there would not have been a significant impact on the results because of this, I would have liked to have seen an explanation of why that is the case.
        Another area in the article that I thought was lacking was the explanation of some of the statistical terms and concepts, and how they related to the study. For example, it was explained least-squares linear regression slopes' positions in reference to unity revealed information about the direction of latitudinal migration, or lack of migration. The definition of unity, and the reason for its importance in determining migration patterns were, unfortunately, absent from the article.
 
Part IV
        Figure 1 is included to offer a visual representation of a latitudinal response curve, as well as the latitudinal tolerance, peak abundance, and preferred latitude parameters. This was a useful figure in terms of being able to better conceptualize these terms as a reader. I would not change it.
        Figure 2 shows epoch-epoch linear regression slopes for comparisons of preferred latitude. Due to my lack of statistical modeling experience, I found this figure to be difficult to interpret. It would have been useful to label each of the scatter plots, and provide explanations in the figure caption, describing several of the plots and what pattern of migration they signify.
        Figure 3 shows two graphs, one of preferred latitude changes between adjacent epochs, and one of preferred tolerance changes between epochs, both in normalized rank order. These graphs offer clear visual representations of the hollow curve shape discussed in the article. This figure is informative and effective, so I would not change it. This seemed to offer solid evidence that smaller changes are more common than large changes in the aforementioned parameters.
        Figure 4 is analogous to figure 3, the only difference being that the parameter changes were extracted from comparing adjacent stages, rather than epochs. This figure is also meant to display the hollow curve pattern in both graphs, and show its similarity to the epoch level patterns. I think it would have therefore been more effective to place Figure 3 and Figure 4 either on the same page, or on adjacent pages, so they could be more easily compared visually.  
        Figure 5 is a histogram, illustrating the fluctuating ratio between tropical and extratropical occurrences between epochs. This was used to combat the theory that the results were skewed, showing equatorward bias, due to disproportionate sampling between the equator and the extratropics. I think this figure is clear and effective.
        Table 1 shows that the average first differences are all lower than the bootstrapped averages of preferred latitude and latitudinal tolerance parameters from epoch-to-epoch. The table shows the consistency in all of the epoch comparisons. It also conveys the argument of biogeographic conservatism, since the observed level of changes were lower than what is expected to occur by chance. I do not think the table needs to be improved or revised.
