Erika Ito
4/29/16
“Has the Earth’s Sixth Mass Extinction Already Arrived?”
by Anthony Barnosky, Nicholas Matzke, Susumu Tomiya, Guinevere Wogan, Brian Swartz, Tiago Quental, Charles Marshall, Jenny McGuire, Emily Lindsey, Kaitlin Maguire, Ben Mersey, and Elizabeth Ferrer (2011)
Part I
	This article addresses the question of whether or not the Earth is currently experiencing the sixth mass extinction event. The authors discuss the apparent role of humans in driving recent extinctions of modern species through altering global climate patterns, spreading pathogens, introducing exotic species, extracting resources, and fragmenting habitats. To evaluate the intensity of modern extinction rates, they were compared to the levels of diversity loss associated with the Big Five mass extinctions. The authors investigated the magnitude of modern extinction, and its rates relative to background rates. Current extinction rates were estimated by extrapolating the proportion of species extinct in one or several centuries to compare it to the apparent background extinction rates of the fossil record over million-year timescales. In doing this, they found that current extinction rates are elevated above normal background rates, and that they have risen quickly, and notably since pre-anthropogenic times. They claim this is a robust result, especially because modern rates calculated most likely greatly underestimated extinctions per million species-years values. The percentage loss associated with the Big Five, was compared with percentage of species loss in historical times. The results of this approach suggested that the sixth mass extinction has not yet begun, but if all of the currently threatened species go extinct, we be about halfway to the mass extinction benchmark. Species-area relationships and allied modelling approaches which relate species loss to habitat loss results predict similar percentages of future species extinctions. The authors lastly evaluated if current rates of extinction would result in a magnitude of extinction comparable to and within the same time span of the Big Five. By combining the rate and magnitude results discussed above, the authors concluded if current trends in extinction continue, the Earth could reach diversity losses that are comparable to the Big Five in severity within a few centuries. By calculating magnitudes of extinction in different scenarios, they concluded that modern extinction rates are higher than those associated with the Big Five extinctions, and they may reach the benchmark 75% loss magnitude in as soon as 300 years. The authors concluded that modern extinction trends do not yet qualify as the sixth mass extinction, but recent species losses are dramatic, and losses of endangered and vulnerable species could result in reaching the sixth mass extinction in a few centuries. They argue this is especially important to realize that ecological stressors such as climate change and elevated CO2 seen today have also coincided with past mass extinctions.
Part II
	I enjoyed how thorough the authors were in explaining some of the issues associated with the study. For example, they discuss the difference between the typical analyzation of fossils and modern taxa in terms of the species concept used. This is not something I have thought about before, when thinking about these types of studies. They also mention the lack of assessment of many modern species such as bivalves, making it difficult to compare modern extinction risks with historical extinction risks using bivalve fossils, which are abundant in the rock record. The fact that they accounted for these issues by using very modest estimations of current extinction rates and magnitude made the article even more convincing. Thoroughly accounting for these issues also very effectively opened the floor for future studies in the field. 
      I also liked that the authors discuss the need to study clade dynamics further in the context of extinction patterns. As we read in a previous article, geographic ranges are better maintained at the genus level over long periods of time through major climatic changes. This suggests the patterns of higher taxonomic orders may differ greatly compared to that of species in terms of extinction patterns, since range size plays such a large role in extinction vulnerability. It would be interesting to see a similar study done, studying the extinction patterns of higher taxonomic ranks rather than species.
Part III
      There are several aspects of the article that I felt could have been explored further. One of them is how different types of human activities or differing human impact scenarios may be expected to change modern extinction patterns. I know this has been addressed in other studies, particularly focusing on the impacts of land use changes on biodiversity. Given the interests of this article in promoting the need for conservation measures, it would have been effective to explore this a little more deeply. 
      Further exploring the average duration of recovery after mass extinctions would have also enhanced the article. Specifically, it would have been interesting to see or discuss what the relationship is between the magnitude and rate of mass extinctions and the recovery period. This too, is important to discuss when thinking about future extinction mitigation strategies. 
Part IV
	Table 1 summarized the Big Five mass extinctions and their possible causes. This was a good table to include in the introduction, to get the reader thinking about the definition of mass extinctions and the conditions the ecological stresses that have triggered them in the past. 
	Table 2 summarized the methods the authors used in their analyses. This was also helpful as a reference when reading through the authors’ explanations of their evaluations and results.
      Figure 1 demonstrated the relationship between extinction rates expressed in extinction per million species-years, and the time interval for which it was calculated. This graph was useful because data from it was referenced several times in the article, and it was useful to reference in the portion of the article explaining the E/MSY metric comparisons between background rates. You see a general increase in the E/MSY value, supporting the authors’ conclusions that current extinction rates exceed the normal background rate, particularly based on extinctions recorded since 2010. This graph was very cluttered, and difficult to understand immediately, it may have been better to divide some of this data into several graphs, rather than fitting it all in one. 
	Figure 2 shows extinction magnitudes of numerous taxa expressed as percentage of species lost in historical times, the mass-extinction benchmark of 75% species loss, and the Big Five species losses. The percentage of threatened species was also shown alongside the percentage of those extinct. This graph was very readable, and clearly demonstrated the difference between modern extinction magnitudes and those associated with the Big Five.
	Figure 3 is a graph showing extinction rates plotted against magnitude. This graph was also fairly cluttered. However, it demonstrated clearly that modern rates of species loss may result in a mass extinction in a geologically short period of time, especially if threatened and critically endangered species are lost.
	


 
