Erika Ito
Write-Up 9
3/28/16
Decoupling of Taxonomic and Ecologic Severity of Phanerozoic Marine Mass Extinctions
by Mary L. Droser, David J. Bottjer, Peter M. Sheehan, and George R. McGhee Jr. (2000)
Part I
	In this article, the authors investigated the ecological impacts of marine mass extinctions. They specifically looked at the Late Ordovician and Late Devonian marine mass extinctions, due to their similarity in taxonomic losses at the family level. These mass extinctions also both occurred during a time when Paleozoic evolutionary fauna dominated marine assemblages. To evaluate differences in ecological shifts between these two extinctions, the authors utilized a ranking system, scaled from one to four, to categorize paleoecological changes by severity. These four paleoecological levels were defined and assigned respective, characteristic signals. Using this system, impacts on the reef, pelagic, and benthic communities were evaluated for the Late Ordovician and Late Devonian mass extinctions. The impacts of the nekton community were also ranked for the Late Devonian mass extinction. Using this system, the authors determined that although the Late Ordovician mass extinction had slightly larger levels of taxonomic loss than the Devonian, the Late Devonian extinction had more significant ecological impacts, leading to larger ecosystem structural changes. 
	The authors compared their results to results from Sepkoski and Miller’s study on ecological distribution of marine communities during the Paleozoic. Sepkoski and Miller used a data matrix, characterizing taxonomic compositions and environmental positions from an offshore to nearshore gradient. They then used factor analysis of the matrix to determine the positions of Cambrian, Paleozoic, and modern evolutionary faunas over time. Their study confirmed the authors’ work, showing a lack of faunal displacement during the Late Ordovician mass extinction, contrasted by a major ecological reversal between modern and Paleozoic fauna in inner shelf regions during the Late Devonian. This similarly reflected the greater ecological impact of the Late Devonian mass extinction compared to the Late Ordovician mass extinction. From these results, the authors concluded that maintenance of ecological structures following mass extinctions is dependent on the impacts on some taxa over others. Because of this, taxonomic loss only gives one piece of the larger picture of the impacts of mass extinction. They went on to suggest that the ecological significance of dominant or keystone taxa over long timescales is important to consider for the mitigation of ecological changes occurring today. 
Part II
	I appreciated that the authors used specific examples to convey larger conclusions they drew from their study, without clouding the main argument of the article with excess information. A good example of this was when they explained the ecological value of some taxa over others. To illustrate this concept, they used the example of Metazoan reefs, explaining the importance of stromatoporoids for providing a structures in which tabulate corals could thrive. This was a concise and easily digestible way of communicating their conclusions. 
	I also like that the authors postulated several triggers for evolutionary, turnover and dominant taxa including vegetation changes, nutrient flux changes, and shifts in predation.  They also gave several reasons as to why certain taxa are valuable in maintaining ecological structures over time. I found this interesting because the biggest question after reading the paper is what causes differences in the magnitude of ecological change between extinction events, and what types of triggers may threaten ecologically important taxa. I think these are the most important question to answer as a follow up to this study, and these postulations seemed to be the first step in unraveling them. 

Part III
      There were several parts of the article that I thought lacked more specific quantitative or visual data. One example of this was when the authors stated that the Devonian metazoan reef ecosystems had an areal extent that was about ten times the extent of reefal ecosystems today. I felt that quantifying that with actual numerical estimates of areal extents would have been more useful, accurate, and effective. Especially because reefal ecosystems are degrading at such a rapid rate in modern times, I felt that it would have been better to use a numerical estimate so the article does not lose accuracy as time goes on. 
 	I also thought that graphs, ages, or numerical data may have been useful in the section where the paleoecological levels were being discussed for each of the two mass extinctions studied. To explain the relative differences between the Late Devonian and Late Ordovician mass extinction in terms of ecological impacts, the authors used specific examples, which I found to be a good way of organizing the section. For example, for the Late Ordovician extinction, the authors gave many examples of taxa that were greatly reduced, but then diversified quickly after the extinction. Showing several graphs of diversity of these taxa across this time interval would have been a good way of more precisely illustrating the post-extinction rebound that was repeatedly described. 

Part IV
	The table in the article summarized the definitions and signals for each of the paleoecological levels used to rank ecological changes resulting from mass extinctions. This was useful as a reference when reading the section about the differing ecological changes during and after the Late Devonian and Late Ordovician mass extinctions. 
	The figure in the article was from Sepkoski and Miller’s data showing the position of the major evolutionary faunas over a onshore to offshore spatial gradient over time. I felt that this was an incredibly powerful figure in terms of supporting the conclusions made in the article of the greater ecological changes during the Late Devonian extinction compared to the Ordovician. It also was incredibly helpful in understanding Sepkoski and Miller’s results from their study, and was easier to understand than the text description.


