Erika Ito
Write-Up 6
2/27/16

How Good was the Fossil Record? Clues from the Californian Pleistocene
by James W. Valentine (1989)

Part I
        This article investigates the nature and biases of the benthic marine fossil record. To do this, Valentine chose a sample pool of represent the pool from which fossils were assembled. He chose a living sample pool of species within the classes Gastropoda and Bivalvia in the Californian Province. It was assumed that this sample pool would be a good approximation for the pool from which fossils for the last million years were drawn. This assumption was used to evaluate the completeness of the Californian Province benthic shelf fossil record. Pleistocene fossil records within the Californian Province were compared to the chosen sample pool. Shell morphology was used to identify Pleistocene species with living species. Valentine observed that 77% of the living species pool were found in the Pleistocene fossil record. Most of the species from the living sample pool that were not also found in the fossil record were fragile, rare, small, live at greater depths today, or have multiple of these qualities. He concluded that despite the episodic nature of the accumulation of species-rich dead assemblages, these accumulations provide a fairly complete picture of the easily fossilized living faunal communities that existed at the time of preservation. This suggests that incompleteness or gaps in the fossil record of species with durable skeletons is mostly due to destructive processes acting on fossils, rather than a lack of initial accumulation. Valentine argues that despite these processes, the fossil record from just a few locations may offer a fairly complete snapshot of the living communities at the time of preservation for up to a million years post-accumulation. He ends the article suggesting fossil-rich localities may not represent a period of strange conditions allowing for increased preservation. They may in fact be representative of what were once common forms that were subsequently mostly buried or destroyed, and therefore present great opportunities to understand the fossil record of skeletonized species.
 
Part II
        The author mentioned several tropical species which were recorded once in the Californian Province, but were not seen again. He offered two possible explanations for this: one being that the record may have been wrong, the other being that species may have moved into or retreated from the Californian Province during the window of time that fossils have been recorded. A possible explanation for this was the carrying of larvae to the region due via a northward flowing current. I appreciated that the dynamic nature of oceanic currents over geologic time was taken into account by the author. The direction and the strength of oceanic currents changes over long timescales due to changes in temperature and density gradients. I think this would undoubtedly have an impact on the fossil record, particularly due to the drifting of small forms such as larvae along currents. I liked this this reality was factored into the author's thought process and explanations. 
        Valentine stressed the importance of sampling intensity on the perceived completeness of the fossil record, particularly when looking for rare species. He explained that increasing the sampling effort would likely cause an increase in the fossil species record. I thought that this explanation was clearly explained, and offered a valid argument that the percentage of the living species pool contained in the fossil record may have in fact been underestimated in the study. 


Part III
	In describing the completeness of the fossil record, Valentine stated that nearly all 
"important" and species from the living pool were seen in the fossil record. He repeatedly makes the comment that all important species and species associations were captured in the record. However, he never clearly defines what makes these species important. I would guess that he means broad spatial occurrence, high abundance, or perhaps both. I think it would have helpful if he would have explicitly stated this information. 
Valentine was also slightly vague about his methods in how he matched the living species to fossil species. He said he only used morphological features to do this, I would have liked to know what features were looked at specifically when he grouped the species. 
        I also wondered during the paper whether the paleodepths at the different localities at the time of fossil accumulation may have been different than the modern depths. I am unsure as to whether this may have caused minor temperatures differences that were indicated in the study that Valentine was seeking to explain, but I think it would have been worth mentioning and exploring as a topic.
        I lastly think it would have been interesting to include the number occurrences in the fossil record of some of the species in the article. I think this would have helped conceptualize which species may have been missing from the fossil record simply due to their rarity, and which species are more abundant and thus more likely to be captured in the record. 

Part IV
	Table 1 was helpful in summarizing the data showing the percentage of the living species, genera, and families of Bivalvia and Gastropoda captured in the fossil record in the Californian Province in the Pleistocene. Figure 1 showed the locations of the main localities, and the extent of the Californian Province as mentioned in the text. I think this figure was useful as a reference for coordination purposes when these localities were mentioned. 
	As mentioned in the previous section, I think it would have been interesting to include another table with some of the species and their number of occurrences in the fossil record, for reasons already mentioned.
