Erika Ito
3/14/15
Write-Up 8


Determinants of Extinction in the Fossil Record
By Shanan E. Peters and Michael Foote (2002)


Part I
        This article investigates whether or not the availability the availability of samplable sedimentary rock may bias inferences of biodiversity and extinction rates. It was postulated that last occurrences of taxa may artificially cluster at unconformities or contacts representing depositional environment shifts, which could resemble an extinction even if one did not truly occur. To test these ideas, stage-level records of apparent extinction were compared to the estimation of exposed marine rock. The number of named marine sedimentary formations was used as a proxy to estimate the amount of exposed, samplable rock. With this, the authors found a negative correlation between extinction and preservation of the rock record in the preceding time interval. They also found that when the formation time series was randomized, the correlation between formation data and the observed extinctions decreased compared to the observed formation data. The authors concluded that the time series of formation numbers can be used to estimate variation in the apparent extinction rate. They suggest a couple reasons that the observed rates of genus extinction agree well with the model-predicted rates of genus extinction based on rock availability. One is that the seemingly sudden and dramatic increasing or decreasing trends in apparent extinction rate over time are spurious due to the existence of gaps in the rock record. This would require that extinction rates are relatively constant. The other is that there may be a common mechanism that impacts both extinction and the amount of preserved rock.  

Part II
        I thought the overarching concepts and reasonings at the root of the article were very clearly and thoroughly explained. For example, the authors clearly described how the use of last occurrences to record extinction timings may be problematic for interpreting true extinction rates due to the existence of unconformities in the rock record. Reviewing these geologic concepts were useful because they allowed me as a reader to follow along the thought trajectory of the authors that drove the study. 
        The authors also explained that because poor rock records are less likely to preserve a last occurrence, extinction rates may be artificially high in the preceding interval. Conversely, intervals with good rock records will create preceding intervals with artificially low rates of extinction. This explanation of the offset effect made it easy to understand why and how the authors chose mathematical methods to correlate correlate rock availability with observed extinction rate, using a lag of one stage. 


Part III
        Although the concepts were well explained, I felt that the implications of some of the data results were at times hard to grasp. The authors spent a long time describing the results of their methods in statistical terms, and only briefly and vaguely touching on their implications in reference to the overall impact on rock availability on apparent rates of extinction. This was most evident in the section describing the correlation between apparent extinction rates with the randomized and observed formation time series data. The explanation of the outcomes of the statistical significance testing were somewhat difficult to follow and connect to the overarching questions of the paper. I was able to better understand it after reading it several times over. 


Part IV
        Figure 1 shows the records of apparent genus extinction and the number of marine formations at the stage level. This figure demonstrates that the relationship between rock availability and apparent extinction are imperfect when for each given time interval, creating only a weak, positive correlation between them. This was a good figure to include to lead up to the explanation of the offset effect. 
        Figure 2 shows observed extinction rates overlain with two model-predicted histories. One of them assumed declining extinction rates with varying stage lengths and the other assumed constant stage lengths and extinction rates. This figure shows that both model predictions capture a significant amount of the features of the observed extinction curve. The implications of this figure are provided later in the article, however I think it would have been useful to include a blurb below the actual figure giving a short explanation of its implications in terms of the overarching questions of the study.
        Figure 3 shows the null distributions for the models described from figure 2. Like in figure 2, I think it would have been helpful to include a blurb below the figure addressing the figure’s broader implications in the study, going beyond statistical terms.
        Table 1 shows data correlations for de-trended extinction rate time series and the model-predicted time series of extinction rates for various formation compilations. This figure demonstrates that even with varying model predictions, the product-moment correlation coefficients are fairly similar. I would not change this table, it illustrates the undeniable relationship with the amount of available rock and apparent extinction rates.
