Erika Ito
Write-Up 13

Dinosaurs in Decline Tens of Millions of Years Before their Final Extinction
by Manabu Sakamoto, Michael J. Benton, and Chris Venditti (2016)

Part I
	This article explores the question of whether or not dinosaurs experienced a long-term decline in diversity prior to their extinction at the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary and Chicxulub impact. The authors used a Bayesian phylogenetic approach to study the relationship between speciation and extinction among dinosaurs. The generalized linear mixed model, which used three dinosaur phylogenetic trees. It was found that the data for the three trees fit best to a model with extinction rate exceeding speciation rate starting about 24 million years before the K-Pg boundary. The fit of the models was evaluated using deviance information criterion and assessment of parameter significance. Model parameters were estimated for the main three dinosaurian subclades: Ornithischia, Sauropodomorpha, and Theropoda, and the speciation dynamics trends for each of the subclades followed the same pattern as the model accounting for all Dinosauria. However, the speciation dynamics models for each of the subclades showed extinction rates exceeding speciation rates even earlier, at 48 – 53 million years before the K-Pg boundary. The subclades Hadrosauriformes and Ceratopsidae deviated from these patterns, in that they did not show indications of the slowing of speciation rates, but they represented only a small percentage of dinosaur species. The authors argue that these findings support the idea that dinosaurs experienced a reduction in their capability to replace their extinct species with newly originated species, making them more vulnerable to major and/or abrupt environmental perturbations, like those that resulted from the Chicxulub impact. The speciation rate was lower than the extinction rate in all three major clades when dinosaurs went extinct, and it had been declining for at least 40 million years before the extinction event. The authors discuss several possible controls on dinosaur speciation including intraclade niche competition and sea level. They also list several possible mechanisms for the long-term decline in dinosaur speciation, and they highlight the need for future studies to look at larger time windows to explore this question.

Part II
      I liked that the authors began the article by stating what types of graphical trends would result from different relationships between speciation and extinction rates. Processing that information first made it simple to compare those expectations to the phylogenetic data reflecting the number of speciation events through time. Furthermore, I felt that providing those expected trends and comparing them to the graphical results was more effective than it would have been to only explain the qualitative significance of the data on its own.  It made the article more convincing and more digestible. 
      I also appreciated that the authors discussed possible causal mechanisms for dinosaur speciation, or the speciation downturn. They strongly refuted the idea that intraclade niche competition caused a decline in speciation by taking into account the number of contemporary branches for each taxon in the model. They found that cladewise lineage was not significantly correlated with speciation patterns. However, they found that sea level has a significant, positive correlation with speciation. They also noted that the inclusion of sea level data in their models did not lessen the observed downturn in dinosaur speciation, despite the fact that sea level rose significantly throughout the Cretaceous. I found this portion of the article to be compelling. It made me think about the complexity of speciation and the many factors that may play into speciation trends over time. I thought that alluding to these complexities was important in inspiring the reader to consider how such factors may interact and how they would change expected trends in speciation.
      
Part III
      I felt that the article lacked the acknowledgment of potential sources of error in their data. The authors stated repeatedly the superiority of their phylogenetic approach compared to studies of taxic diversity through geologic time due to its robustness to sampling or other confounding errors. I would imagine however, that variability in sedimentary preservation may cause some skewing of the data. I do not see how it is impossible that gaps in preservation, and the use of first and last occurrence dates in the models may create spurious speciation events in the models. I think the authors should have explicitly acknowledged or rationally and thoroughly refuted this possibility.
      I also felt that it would have been interesting for the authors to look into and provide some insight on why the hydrosauriforms and the ceratopsids maintained high levels of speciation up to their final extinction. This did not seem to be fully explained, and I think looking deeply into this question would have important implications regarding the controls on the vulnerability of organisms to extinction or diversity loss.  It also is important to more thoroughly explain this simply because the data from these two groups was not consistent with the authors’ main conclusion. The lack of explanation in this area weakens their overall argument.

Part IV
      Figure 1 shows three theoretical graphical models of speciation through time overlain on each other. The three scenarios are speciation and extinction rates remaining constant through time with speciation rate being greater, speciation rate decreasing, becoming equal to extinction rate, and speciation rate decreasing over time to the point that extinction rate becomes greater. This figure was very effective in analyzing figure 2, which showed the temporal speciation patterns of three major dinosaur clades.  These figures together clearly demonstrated an apparent slowdown in dinosaur speciation leading up to the K-Pg extinction. 
      Figure 3 shows he net speciation per million years. When net extinction is below zero, this signified a period where speciation rates were lower than extinction rates. This graph communicated that extinction rates were increasingly higher than speciation rates leading up to the K-Pg extinction, supporting the hypothesis that dinosaurs lacked the capacity to replace extinct species with new ones quickly enough to maintain stable diversity trends, or recover easily from the impact event. This was also displayed as a phylogenetic tree plotted through time, showing a general decrease in net speciation per million years through time among all major clades. I felt that all of the figures in this article very effectively supported the argument presented by the authors. 
 
      
