Peer Review Proposals
In this lab, you will review a copy of two different peers' proposals. You will give them a copy of your review, and also give me a summary of your review (see Part I).
You will also receive reviews on your proposal from two of your peers. You will give me a summary of those reviews and how you plan to address their comments (see Part II).
Part I 
Summarize the review and comments you gave to your peer. You will need to do this for each proposal that you review (i.e., twice). Be sure to state the name of the person you are reviewing.
Queston 1
Did you feel that the proposal you graded was complete in terms of length, and that it demonstrated a genuine effort on your peer's part. If not, explain what you felt was lacking.

Lauren’s Proposal: Yes. The length of the proposal seemed to abide by the assignment guidelines for character count. 

Phil’s Proposal: Yes. The length of the proposal seemed to abide by the assignment guidelines for character count.
Question 2
Briefly summarize the overarching objective and hypothesis of the reviewed proposal.
Lauren’s hypothesis was that studying morphologic and geographic ranges using fossil data of sauropods from the PBDB would illuminate whether the sauropod hiatus was caused by stratigraphic biases, meaning lack of preservation, or if they went extinct from the Northern Hemisphere and then reinvaded from the Southern Hemisphere. She did not take a specific side over which scenario she thought was correct, rather she stated that her research would pit the scenarios against each other and illuminate the truth.
Phil’s hypothesis was morphological changes evidenced in terrestrial dinosaur fossils can be used to evaluate the impacts and mechanisms behind mass extinction events. 

Question 3
Does the hypothesis meet the following criteria in your estimation? If not, explain why.
* Do you believe that this hypothesis is coherent and understandable?
Lauren’s Proposal: The hypothesis could be inferred from the introduction, however I think it should be stated more explicitly and concisely at the beginning of the proposal.  
Phil’s Proposal: Yes, I felt that it was coherent and understandable, the introduction was well-framed. 
* Do you believe that this hypothesis is novel? 
Lauren’s Proposal: Yes! It seems like a subject that is not yet fully understood and could use further research. 
Phil’s Proposal: Yes, based on Phil’s research, it seems that there is a need for further investigation of extinction events using terrestrial fossils. 
* Do you believe that this hypothesis is testable/feasible?
Lauren’s Proposal: I think that if there is sufficient data in the PBDB of sauropod occurrences such that their geographic ranges can be estimated, and so that their morphological characteristics can be analyzed, that her hypothesis is testable. As long as lack of data is not an issue I think it is very testable.
Phil’s Proposal: Based on Phil’s research it seems that his hypothesis is testable. He has researched a specific location in South Africa that he expects to have abundant dinosaur fossils he could use for his study. The only potential issue I can think of is if there is one or several unconformities which would make morphologic change over time difficult to analyze. 
* Do you believe that this hypothesis is scientifically or socially relevant?
Lauren’s Proposal: Lauren made a good case that the similarity between sauropods and some modern mammals make them valuable for study in terms of their history of migration and extinction. Studies like this may be useful in the field of conservation biology for such mammals.
Phil’s Proposal: Yes. As Phil stated, it is important to understand the response of organisms to extinctions in the wake of what appears to be a modern mass extinction. Studies like this are also useful in the field of conservation biology. 
Question 4
Summarize the areas where you felt that the proposal could be improved.
Lauren’s Proposal: The organization of Lauren’s proposal was somewhat hard to follow. She also did not have a clear introduction to her proposal, stating her objective and hypothesis 

Phil’s Proposal: Phil’s proposal was somewhat vague in terms of what dinosaurs he will be researching and what methods he will use to analyze and present his results. 
Question 5
What constructive criticism did you provide to your peer to address the areas that needed improvement?
Lauren’s Proposal: I think the proposal could have been organized in a more structured way, so it has more clear divides between the introduction, justification, and research plan. I also think the objective and hypothesis should be more explicitly stated at the beginning of the proposal. It may also be useful for her to explain how she will present and analyze her results – i.e. in graph form or statistical analysis.
Phil’s Proposal: I think it would be useful for Phil to explain what type of dinosaur he may be focusing on if relevant. I also think it would be useful for him to say exactly how he is going to determine morphologic changes between adjacent time periods, and how he will illustrate his results.
Question 6
Did you feel that this proposal made an adequate use of citation and background research? If not, what additional information did you want to see?
Lauren’s Proposal: The background research and citations provided were the strongest part of Lauren’s proposal. She gave a very interesting and well summarized explanation of the sauropod hiatus and the postulations as to why it happened. The proposal did not seem lacking in information. 
Phil’s Proposal: As said, I think Phil’s proposal could use further research into what dinosaur species or genera it would be useful for him to study specifically, and possibly a brief explanation on how the species that were hit hard responded to the extinction event being focused on. 
Part II
Summarize your response to your peers' reviews of your proposal. You will need to do this once for each review you recieved. State who was your reviewer.
Question 1
Did the reviewer clearly understand your hypothesis? If not, what will you do to make it clearer?
Lauren: Yes, it was clearly understood. Although she said I could relate the justification portion of my proposal to the hypothesis more clearly. She also said it would be important to explain more explicitly how the results of my research plan would prove or disprove my hypothesis.
Phil: Yes, although he thought that the emphasis on the benthic foram extinction discussed in the hypothesis did not clearly connect to the research plan portion of the proposal. He thought that I should more thoroughly explain how the research on carbonate sedimentation relates to the benthic foram extinction.
Question 2
Did the reviewer feel that your proposed project was scientifically or socially relevant? If not, how will you improve it?
Lauren: Yes, she said she felt the justification portion of the proposal was the strongest area of the draft.
Phil: Yes, he said he felt the justification portion of the proposal was the strongest area of the draft. 
Question 3
Did the reviewer approve of your proposed analytical methods? If not, how will you improve them?
Lauren: She approved, but had some suggestions. Lauren pointed out that it is important to mention and be aware of where my seawater samples come from. She also had a suggestion about what type of carbonate microfossil samples to use, and mentioned that there is a way to grow microfossils yourself that may be useful for my research plan. 
Phil: Phil approved, but suggested being slightly more specific in outlining my research plan, such as stating exactly how many seawater samples I would need and what kind of time intervals I would take measurements over. 
Question 4
Do you feel that your reviewer did an adequate and thorough job in their review? How could they have improved their review?
Lauren: Yes, she was very helpful and offered some of her own knowledge on geochemistry to relate to my proposal. I cannot think of a way she could have improved the review, but perhaps editing grammatical errors would have been useful as well. 
Phil: Yes, he was very thorough in his feedback, and made sure he fully understood the ideas I was trying to get across so he could give me the best feedback possible. More written feedback on the proposal draft might have been useful, but his oral feedback was very helpful. 
Question 5
In general, what steps will you now take to improve your proposal?
	I am going start by revising my research plan. After talking with Jodi was able to develop a much more specific outline of how I will go about testing my hypothesis. 
	I will also revise my proposal so that my research is more clearly connected with the benthic foram extinction during the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum. 
	I will lastly edit my justification section so it is more concise, and fits into the guidelines for character limit. I also may look for more relevant research to include in the proposal, and to consult for the revision of my research plan now that I have a better idea of what methods to use. 
